
===== PAGE 14 =====
1313
encounter, all of your charactersencounter, all of your characters
defend at +1 against the chaosdefend at +1 against the chaos
fanatics.fanatics.
I know where this corridor leadsI know where this corridor leads: :
Using this secret, you may rerollUsing this secret, you may reroll
one room content table roll. Theone room content table roll. The
result of the reroll is final, even if result of the reroll is final, even if 
less desirable than the previous.less desirable than the previous.
I can cook this, and it’s yummyI can cook this, and it’s yummy: :
Using this secret, a halfling findsUsing this secret, a halfling finds
some rare ingredients such as truf-some rare ingredients such as truf-
fles, mushroom, or spices, that hefles, mushroom, or spices, that he
can cook to prepare the party’scan cook to prepare the party’s
next meal. Until the end of thenext meal. Until the end of the
dungeon, the party members willdungeon, the party members will
all have +1 to their Save rolls toall have +1 to their Save rolls to
resist Madness, fear, or disease.resist Madness, fear, or disease.
You need at least one halfling inYou need at least one halfling in
the party to be able to discover andthe party to be able to discover and
to use this secret.to use this secret.

===== PAGE 15 =====
1414
Expert SkillsExpert Skills
Expert skills are an interestingExpert skills are an interesting
option for characters. Charactersoption for characters. Characters
learn expert skillslearn expert skillsinstead ofinstead oflevel-level-
ing up. The character chooses a skilling up. The character chooses a skill
that he wants to learn and makesthat he wants to learn and makes
an xp roll using d8+2. If the roll isan xp roll using d8+2. If the roll is
successful, he does not add a level,successful, he does not add a level,
but learns the expert skill of hisbut learns the expert skill of his
choice instead. If the roll fails, thechoice instead. If the roll fails, the
skill is not learned and the xp roll isskill is not learned and the xp roll is
wasted. There is no limit to thewasted. There is no limit to the
number of skills that a characternumber of skills that a character
can have or to the number of timescan have or to the number of times
that a character can try his or herthat a character can try his or her
xp roll. A natural roll of 7 xp roll. A natural roll of 7 or 8 on theor 8 on the
d8 xp roll is always a success.d8 xp roll is always a success.
Example: Dostus is a 6th level Example: Dostus is a 6th level 
wizard. Dostus wants to learnwizard. Dostus wants to learn
the Lesser Necromancy the Lesser Necromancy 
expert skill. To level up or gainexpert skill. To level up or gain
an expert skill, Dostus must an expert skill, Dostus must 
roll a 5 or better. If Dostusroll a 5 or better. If Dostus
were 9were 9 th th  level, he would still   level, he would still 
learn the skill by rolling a 7 or learn the skill by rolling a 7 or 
8 on the d8.8 on the d8.
Each expert skill may be taken onlyEach expert skill may be taken only
ONCE by a character.ONCE by a character.
For example, the Deadly Accu-For example, the Deadly Accu-
racy skill gives a +1 to ranged racy skill gives a +1 to ranged 
attacks, but you may not takeattacks, but you may not take
it twice to gain a +2.it twice to gain a +2.
The number of expert skills that The number of expert skills that thethe
character possesses does notcharacter possesses does not
modify the xp roll to gain a new skillmodify the xp roll to gain a new skill
or for leveling up. All you have toor for leveling up. All you have to
do is to beat the character’s currentdo is to beat the character’s current
level number, or roll a 7 or 8.level number, or roll a 7 or 8.
Who Can Learn SkillsWho Can Learn Skills: Not all char-: Not all char-
acters may take all the skills. Theacters may take all the skills. The
classes that can take a skill areclasses that can take a skill are
listed in parentheses after thelisted in parentheses after the
name of the skill (W= warrior, B=name of the skill (W= warrior, B=
Barbarian, C= cleric, R= rogue, Wi=Barbarian, C= cleric, R= rogue, Wi=
wizard, E= elf, D= dwarf, H= halfling,wizard, E= elf, D= dwarf, H= halfling,
and S= Swashbuckler).and S= Swashbuckler).
Suggestion: Do not add all theSuggestion: Do not add all the
skills into the game at theskills into the game at the
same time. The skill systemsame time. The skill system
 gives  gives you you “some“something thing else else toto
do” with xp rolls, but leveling do” with xp rolls, but leveling 
up your characters is asup your characters is as
important. With too many important. With too many 
skills, running your party skills, running your party 
become complicated, and youbecome complicated, and you
might forget to use them.might forget to use them.
They work well for They work well for 
cooperative/group play cooperative/group play 
where every player runs only where every player runs only 
one character.one character.

===== PAGE 16 =====
1515
Acute Acute Hearing Hearing (R, (R, E, E, H)H)
The character may listen carefullyThe character may listen carefully
at a door before opening it. Thisat a door before opening it. This
requires rolling a 6 or better. Arequires rolling a 6 or better. A
successful hearing roll allows yousuccessful hearing roll allows you
to roll the room’s content beforeto roll the room’s content before
opening the door. If the roomopening the door. If the room
contains monsters, you will knowcontains monsters, you will know
what monsters they are but notwhat monsters they are but not
their exact numbers (do not rolltheir exact numbers (do not roll
for their numbers until you enterfor their numbers until you enter
the room). Once you know whatthe room). Once you know what
monster is in the room, thatmonster is in the room, that
monster may not surprise themonster may not surprise the
party, and you may decide to avoidparty, and you may decide to avoid
the room and take an alternativethe room and take an alternative
route, or come back to the roomroute, or come back to the room
later. You may attempt to listenlater. You may attempt to listen
only once per door, even if youonly once per door, even if you
have multiple characters with thishave multiple characters with this
skill. If the roll fails, the monstersskill. If the roll fails, the monsters
on the other side are simply beingon the other side are simply being
silent or motionless, or there issilent or motionless, or there is
nothing to be heard.nothing to be heard.
Arcane Tanner (B, Wi)Arcane Tanner (B, Wi)
The The character character may use may use the skin the skin of of 
certain magical beasts to createcertain magical beasts to create
special garments. The two possiblespecial garments. The two possible
in this book are phasing pantherin this book are phasing panther
skin and dragon skin. Adventuresskin and dragon skin. Adventures
may add other skins.may add other skins.
Phasing panther skinPhasing panther skin: this bluish: this bluish
cape allows the wearer to cast thecape allows the wearer to cast the
Escape spell once per adventureEscape spell once per adventure
as if he were a level 6 wizard. Theas if he were a level 6 wizard. The
effect is clearly magical in nature,effect is clearly magical in nature,
so barbarians will not use it, but allso barbarians will not use it, but all
other characters may use it.other characters may use it.
Dragon SkinDragon Skin: The character may: The character may
use the skin of a dragon to createuse the skin of a dragon to create
a garment that gives the wearer aa garment that gives the wearer a
+1 to all saves versus dragon+1 to all saves versus dragon
breath and +1 to Defense rollsbreath and +1 to Defense rolls
against against dragon dragon attacks. attacks. ThisThis
garment garment is not is not magic and magic and may bemay be
used by barbarians.used by barbarians.
Both of these skins are not consid-Both of these skins are not consid-
ered armor and may be worn evenered armor and may be worn even
by characters (of all sizes) that areby characters (of all sizes) that are
not allowed to wear armor, likenot allowed to wear armor, like
wizards. The Defense bonus iswizards. The Defense bonus is
cumulative with other bonusescumulative with other bonuses
from armor and shield. The skinsfrom armor and shield. The skins
may be worn over other armor.may be worn over other armor.
They may also be sold for 150 gpThey may also be sold for 150 gp
each.each.
Berserk Fury (B)Berserk Fury (B)
A barbarian with this skill may useA barbarian with this skill may use
his rage attack twice per adven-his rage attack twice per adven-
ture. This skill does not affectture. This skill does not affect
ranged attacks.ranged attacks.
Brawler (B, W)Brawler (B, W)
The character’s unarmed attacksThe character’s unarmed attacks
are at -1, not -2.are at -1, not -2.

===== PAGE 17 =====
1616
Combat Acrobatics (H, E)Combat Acrobatics (H, E)
The character with this skill mayThe character with this skill may
trade places in the trade places in the marching ordermarching order
with another character duringwith another character during
combat. Elves vault in the air overcombat. Elves vault in the air over
their friends, while halflings aretheir friends, while halflings are
pretty good at moving under thepretty good at moving under the
other characters’ legs. Exchangingother characters’ legs. Exchanging
places requires a full turn, so theplaces requires a full turn, so the
acrobatic character may notacrobatic character may not
perform an attack while doing so.perform an attack while doing so.
Commanding Presence (Wi, W)Commanding Presence (Wi, W)
If a character with this skill is in If a character with this skill is in thethe
front places of the marching order,front places of the marching order,
all characters have +1 to save rollsall characters have +1 to save rolls
versus fear or terror. Hirelings haveversus fear or terror. Hirelings have
+1 to their morale rolls. The bonus+1 to their morale rolls. The bonus
also applies when the party isalso applies when the party is
attacked from behind in a attacked from behind in a corridorcorridor
or in a or in a similar surprise situation.similar surprise situation.
Continual Light (Wi, C)Continual Light (Wi, C)
The cleric or wizard may create aThe cleric or wizard may create a
magical light that is equivalent to amagical light that is equivalent to a
lantern. The light is cast on a holylantern. The light is cast on a holy
symbol or on a coin hanging fromsymbol or on a coin hanging from
a necklace, allowing the charactera necklace, allowing the character
to shine it as a flashlight or hide itto shine it as a flashlight or hide it
when needed. The light turns off if when needed. The light turns off if 
the character is killed. This skill isthe character is killed. This skill is
useful to free one hand, but if theuseful to free one hand, but if the
user dies, and you have no lantern,user dies, and you have no lantern,
the party will have to retrace itsthe party will have to retrace its
steps out of the dungeon and fightsteps out of the dungeon and fight
with the darkness modifiers aswith the darkness modifiers as
explained inexplained in Four Against DarknessFour Against Darkness. .
The Cleric may also cast it inThe Cleric may also cast it in
combat, by forfeiting his attack forcombat, by forfeiting his attack for
that turn.that turn.
This ability is magical in nature, butThis ability is magical in nature, but
does not use up one of the spelldoes not use up one of the spell
“slots” for the spell caster. Note that“slots” for the spell caster. Note that
the character may cast the spell onthe character may cast the spell on
an object worn by an object worn by another charac-another charac-
ter.ter.
Create Holy Water (C )Create Holy Water (C )
Prior to each adventure, a clericPrior to each adventure, a cleric
with this skill can create one vial of with this skill can create one vial of 
holy water. Producing it costs 10 gpholy water. Producing it costs 10 gp
per vial.per vial.
Culling of the Weak (B, W, D)Culling of the Weak (B, W, D)
This skill applies only once perThis skill applies only once per
combat encounter, on the first suc-combat encounter, on the first suc-
cessful Attack roll performed by thecessful Attack roll performed by the
character. Note by how manycharacter. Note by how many
points his Attack roll beats the min-points his Attack roll beats the min-
ions’ level. One additional minion isions’ level. One additional minion is
slain per every full TWO points overslain per every full TWO points over
the required target number.the required target number.
Example: the character Example: the character 
attacks a level 7 minion and attacks a level 7 minion and 
scores a total of 13 on hisscores a total of 13 on his
 Attack  Attack roll. roll. 13 13 is is 6 6 pointspoints
above 7, so 3 additional min-above 7, so 3 additional min-
ions, for a total of 4 minions,ions, for a total of 4 minions,
are slain.are slain.

===== PAGE 18 =====
1717

===== PAGE 19 =====
1818
This skill has no effect on bossThis skill has no effect on boss
monsters.monsters.
Danger Sense (B, R, H, E)Danger Sense (B, R, H, E)
If a character with this skill is in If a character with this skill is in thethe
rearguard (position 3 or 4 of therearguard (position 3 or 4 of the
marching order), attacks from wan-marching order), attacks from wan-
dering monsters do not surprisedering monsters do not surprise
the party. The party will attackthe party. The party will attack
before the monsters and will before the monsters and will enjoyenjoy
the protection of shields againstthe protection of shields against
them.them.
Deadly Accuracy (E, H)Deadly Accuracy (E, H)
The character has +1 to Attack rollsThe character has +1 to Attack rolls
when using a bow (elves) or a slingwhen using a bow (elves) or a sling
(halflings).(halflings).
Dead Shot (E, H)Dead Shot (E, H)
The character may reroll all failedThe character may reroll all failed
attack rolls performed with aattack rolls performed with a
ranged weapon.ranged weapon.
Deadly Strike (W, B)Deadly Strike (W, B)
The character with this skill may,The character with this skill may,
once per encounter, inflict twoonce per encounter, inflict two
wounds when striking with a two-wounds when striking with a two-
handed weapon or two-handedhanded weapon or two-handed
mace. This is not cumulative withmace. This is not cumulative with
other skills that increase theother skills that increase the
damage delivered by the charac-damage delivered by the charac-
ter’s blow. You must decide to useter’s blow. You must decide to use
this skill BEFORE rolling to hit. If thethis skill BEFORE rolling to hit. If the
blow is successful, you inflict twoblow is successful, you inflict two
hits. If the blow does not hit, thehits. If the blow does not hit, the
attempt for that encounter isattempt for that encounter is
wasted and you cannot use thewasted and you cannot use the
ability until you ability until you encounter anotherencounter another
enemy.enemy.
Detective (W, R)Detective (W, R)
The character has a +1 whenThe character has a +1 when
searching an empty room, but asearching an empty room, but a
success may be used only to find asuccess may be used only to find a
clue (not to find hidden treasure orclue (not to find hidden treasure or
a secret door).a secret door).
Double Attack (W,R,E)Double Attack (W,R,E)
The character with this skill canThe character with this skill can
perform two Attack rolls per turn.perform two Attack rolls per turn.
Attacks may be directed at the sameAttacks may be directed at the same
target or at two different targets, astarget or at two different targets, as
you see fit. This skill may be usedyou see fit. This skill may be used
with hand weapons only. A charac-with hand weapons only. A charac-
ter may not use this skill with a lightter may not use this skill with a light
weapon or a two-handed weapon.weapon or a two-handed weapon.
This skill may be used only once perThis skill may be used only once per
encounter.encounter.
Dragonslayer’s Strike (D)Dragonslayer’s Strike (D)
The character’s first Attack roll, if The character’s first Attack roll, if 
successful, is at +1 and inflicts 2successful, is at +1 and inflicts 2
wounds on a dragon if it hits. Thiswounds on a dragon if it hits. This
skill works only on the first attackskill works only on the first attack
performed against a dragon. Afterperformed against a dragon. After
one turn, the dragon will realizeone turn, the dragon will realize
that he is fighting a dragonslayerthat he is fighting a dragonslayer
and will adopt a fighting stance thatand will adopt a fighting stance that
protects him from this skill.protects him from this skill.

===== PAGE 20 =====
1919
Dying Action (W, B, D)Dying Action (W, B, D)
When the character loses his lastWhen the character loses his last
life point, he may perform anlife point, he may perform an
Attack roll at +1 before dying.Attack roll at +1 before dying.
Gladiator (W,B)Gladiator (W,B)
The character attacks and The character attacks and defendsdefends
at +1 in any fights generated by theat +1 in any fights generated by the
Trial of Champions monster reac-Trial of Champions monster reac-
tion.tion.
Impervious (W, B, D)Impervious (W, B, D)
The character has learned to antic-The character has learned to antic-
ipate the move of a certain type of ipate the move of a certain type of 
attacker. Choose one monster typeattacker. Choose one monster type
from any minion or vermin tablefrom any minion or vermin table
fromfrom Four Against The AbyssFour Against The Abyss or or Four Four 
 Agai Against nst DarDarknesskness. The character has. The character has
+1 to all Defense roll against that+1 to all Defense roll against that
monster. Write it on the play sheetmonster. Write it on the play sheet
as “Impervious to” followed by theas “Impervious to” followed by the
monster’s name, e.g. impervious tomonster’s name, e.g. impervious to
goblins, impervious to skeletons,goblins, impervious to skeletons,
etc. A character may take this skilletc. A character may take this skill
multiple times, becoming Impervi-multiple times, becoming Impervi-
ous against more than oneous against more than one
monster type.monster type.
Intuition (H, R, Wi)Intuition (H, R, Wi)
If a character with Intuition is in theIf a character with Intuition is in the
party, you may treat a roll of 4 onparty, you may treat a roll of 4 on
the search roll as a 5. This skill maythe search roll as a 5. This skill may
NOT be combined with the Detec-NOT be combined with the Detec-
tive skill.tive skill.
Knife Throwing (Wi, W, R, H)Knife Throwing (Wi, W, R, H)
When armed with a light slashingWhen armed with a light slashing
light hand weapon (such as a knife,light hand weapon (such as a knife,
dirk, or dagger), the character maydirk, or dagger), the character may
throw it (at -1 on throw it (at -1 on the Attack roll, asthe Attack roll, as
normal for a light weapon) using itnormal for a light weapon) using it
as a ranged weapon. The characteras a ranged weapon. The character
loses the knife until the end of theloses the knife until the end of the
encounter. At that point he can pickencounter. At that point he can pick
it up from the floor or from theit up from the floor or from the
body of a slain opponent. A charac-body of a slain opponent. A charac-
ter may carry up to 5 knives in ater may carry up to 5 knives in a
bandolier. The character can drawbandolier. The character can draw
and throw a knife (or draw a knifeand throw a knife (or draw a knife
and use it as a hand weapon) withand use it as a hand weapon) with
a single attack action.a single attack action.
Lesser Necromancy (Wi)Lesser Necromancy (Wi)
When a friend dies, a wizard withWhen a friend dies, a wizard with
this skill may perform a ritual on athis skill may perform a ritual on a
dead comrade. The Wizard rolls d8dead comrade. The Wizard rolls d8
+L, trying to roll higher than the+L, trying to roll higher than the
deceased character’s level. A roll of deceased character’s level. A roll of 
1 is always a failure and a roll of 71 is always a failure and a roll of 7
or 8 explodes, as usual. If the roll isor 8 explodes, as usual. If the roll is
successful, the deceased charactersuccessful, the deceased character
comes back to life as an undeadcomes back to life as an undead
creature, with half the maximumcreature, with half the maximum
life points he had when he was alivelife points he had when he was alive
(for example, a barbarian who had(for example, a barbarian who had
10 Life points will come back to life10 Life points will come back to life
as a 5 Life points creature). Theas a 5 Life points creature). The
character’s level will be the same ascharacter’s level will be the same as
when he was alive, minus 1, with awhen he was alive, minus 1, with a
minimum level of 1. The undeadminimum level of 1. The undead

===== PAGE 21 =====
2020
creature will have no class abilitiescreature will have no class abilities
or bonus to attack or defense rolls,or bonus to attack or defense rolls,
and he will fight for the party untiland he will fight for the party until
destroyed. A friend reanimated bydestroyed. A friend reanimated by
lesser necromancy may NOT belesser necromancy may NOT be
resurrected later. A wizard mayresurrected later. A wizard may
control a single undead at a time,control a single undead at a time,
and may automatically destroy theand may automatically destroy the
reanimated corpse at any time. If areanimated corpse at any time. If a
cleric in the party uses the Turncleric in the party uses the Turn
Undead skill while a reanimatedUndead skill while a reanimated
character is in the group, character is in the group, the rean-the rean-
imated character will turn and imated character will turn and flee.flee.
Negotiator (Wi, E, R, H)Negotiator (Wi, E, R, H)
When rolling a monster’s reactions,When rolling a monster’s reactions,
you may alter the rolled result by 1you may alter the rolled result by 1
upwards or downwards if doing soupwards or downwards if doing so
would give you a result other thanwould give you a result other than
Fight or Fight to the Death.Fight or Fight to the Death.
Orcslayer (E, D)Orcslayer (E, D)
The character gets +1 to Attack rollsThe character gets +1 to Attack rolls
when fighting orcs (any creaturewhen fighting orcs (any creature
with the word “orc” in its name,with the word “orc” in its name,
including orc hordes).including orc hordes).
Poison Resistance (D, H, B)Poison Resistance (D, H, B)
The character can reroll a failedThe character can reroll a failed
save versus poison.save versus poison.
Protective Incense (C, Wi)Protective Incense (C, Wi)
The character can, once perThe character can, once per
encounter, protect himself orencounter, protect himself or
another character in the partyanother character in the party
(including a barbarian, if needed)(including a barbarian, if needed)
with a special blessed incense. Thewith a special blessed incense. The
protected character gains +1 toprotected character gains +1 to
Defense rolls against demons andDefense rolls against demons and
undead. This bonus is cumulativeundead. This bonus is cumulative
with other Defense bonuses fromwith other Defense bonuses from
magic items, armor, shields, etc.magic items, armor, shields, etc.
Quick Footed (E, H, R)Quick Footed (E, H, R)
When the character receives anWhen the character receives an
attack while leaving a combat orattack while leaving a combat or
withdrawing, he defends at +1.withdrawing, he defends at +1.
Scroll Maker (W, E, C)Scroll Maker (W, E, C)
The character with this skill mayThe character with this skill may
create one magic scroll before eachcreate one magic scroll before each
new adventure. He can only createnew adventure. He can only create
a scroll containing a single spella scroll containing a single spell
that he could cast. Clerics may that he could cast. Clerics may onlyonly
create scrolls with the Blessingcreate scrolls with the Blessing
spell. Creating a scroll requiresspell. Creating a scroll requires
special materials costing 80 goldspecial materials costing 80 gold
pieces. The materials are destroyedpieces. The materials are destroyed
when the spell is cast, so youwhen the spell is cast, so you
cannot reuse the parchment.cannot reuse the parchment.
Shield Bash (W)Shield Bash (W)
The character has learned to useThe character has learned to use
his shield offensively. This skill mayhis shield offensively. This skill may
be used only by a warrior equippedbe used only by a warrior equipped
with a shield. When the characterwith a shield. When the character
rolls an exploding dice resulrolls an exploding dice result on hist on his
Defense roll, he may immediatelyDefense roll, he may immediately
perform a free, out-of-sequenceperform a free, out-of-sequence
Attack roll at -1 at the opponentAttack roll at -1 at the opponent

===== PAGE 22 =====
2121
against whom he is defending. Thisagainst whom he is defending. This
is a crushing weapon attack, deliv-is a crushing weapon attack, deliv-
ered with the shield.ered with the shield.
Spore Alchemy (E, H, Wi, R)Spore Alchemy (E, H, Wi, R)
If the party defeats any fungus menIf the party defeats any fungus men
or shrieking fungi, the characteror shrieking fungi, the character
may prepare a dose of sleep sporesmay prepare a dose of sleep spores
that may be thrown at an enemy.that may be thrown at an enemy.
This counts as a single use of aThis counts as a single use of a
Sleep spell. It will not affect mon-Sleep spell. It will not affect mon-
sters described as immune to Sleepsters described as immune to Sleep
or immune to poison, or otheror immune to poison, or other
fungi monsters. Throwing thefungi monsters. Throwing the
spores counts as the character’sspores counts as the character’s
attack for that turn. The spores mayattack for that turn. The spores may
be used only by the character withbe used only by the character with
the Spore Alchemy skill. They arethe Spore Alchemy skill. They are
too delicate and dangerous totoo delicate and dangerous to
handle for characters without thehandle for characters without the
skill.skill.
Spot Weakness (R, Wi)Spot Weakness (R, Wi)
When an Attack roll hits with anWhen an Attack roll hits with an
exploding dice result, the characterexploding dice result, the character
inflicts an additional wound. Thisinflicts an additional wound. This
ability works only on bosses. Theability works only on bosses. The
character still gets to explode thecharacter still gets to explode the
die.die.
Stabbing Attack (R, Wi)Stabbing Attack (R, Wi)
You may attack twice in a turn withYou may attack twice in a turn with
a light hand weapon such as aa light hand weapon such as a
dagger. Note that, unlike Doubledagger. Note that, unlike Double
Attack, you are not limited to Attack, you are not limited to use ituse it
only once per only once per encounterencounter. .
Stone Mastery (D)Stone Mastery (D)
When you perform a search roll,When you perform a search roll,
you may count a 4 as a 5, but youyou may count a 4 as a 5, but you
may use the result only to find amay use the result only to find a
secret door (not a hint or hiddensecret door (not a hint or hidden
treasure).treasure).
Strong Will (Wi, C, D)Strong Will (Wi, C, D)
The character ignores the firstThe character ignores the first
Madness point he receives in anMadness point he receives in an
adventure, and saves at +1 versusadventure, and saves at +1 versus
fear and terror effects.fear and terror effects.
Super Logic (Wi)Super Logic (Wi)
The wizard adds +1 to all puzzleThe wizard adds +1 to all puzzle
rolls.rolls.
Sworn Enemy (R, W)Sworn Enemy (R, W)
Choose one monster type from anyChoose one monster type from any
minion, boss, or weird monsterminion, boss, or weird monster
table. That monster hates the char-table. That monster hates the char-
acter with the Sworn Enemy skill,acter with the Sworn Enemy skill,
and will attack him whenever pos-and will attack him whenever pos-
sible. The character gets +1 onsible. The character gets +1 on
Attack rolls against that monster.Attack rolls against that monster.
The bonus from this skill is notThe bonus from this skill is not
cumulative with the bonus by thecumulative with the bonus by the
Orcslayer or Dragonslayer skills.Orcslayer or Dragonslayer skills.

===== PAGE 23 =====
2222
Terrifying Terrifying Savagery Savagery (B)(B)
When a barbarian with this skill killsWhen a barbarian with this skill kills
a minion and causes the minions toa minion and causes the minions to
test morale, the morale roll is at -1.test morale, the morale roll is at -1.
The modifier is not cumulative if The modifier is not cumulative if 
there are multiple barbarians withthere are multiple barbarians with
this skill in the party.this skill in the party.
Turn Undead (C)Turn Undead (C)
The character can cause 1d6The character can cause 1d6
undead to flee. This skill may beundead to flee. This skill may be
used only once per encounter.used only once per encounter.
Using this skill requires performingUsing this skill requires performing
a successful d6 roll against thea successful d6 roll against the
level of the Undead. The cleric addslevel of the Undead. The cleric adds
half his level (+½ L) to this roll. If half his level (+½ L) to this roll. If 
more than one type of undead aremore than one type of undead are
present, the skill will target thepresent, the skill will target the
lower-level undead. For example,lower-level undead. For example,
in an encounter with a vampirein an encounter with a vampire
and 5 skeleton minions, the abilityand 5 skeleton minions, the ability
will be directed at the skeletonswill be directed at the skeletons
(unless the party destroys all the(unless the party destroys all the
skeletons first and then the clericskeletons first and then the cleric
uses the Turn Undead ability onuses the Turn Undead ability on
the Vampire).the Vampire).
To use this ability, the cleric mustTo use this ability, the cleric must
use a hand to hold a holy symboluse a hand to hold a holy symbol
in front of the undead creatures.in front of the undead creatures.
 Vampire Hunter (C, W, Wi) Vampire Hunter (C, W, Wi)
A character with his skill adds +1 toA character with his skill adds +1 to
his Attack rolls when fighting vam-his Attack rolls when fighting vam-
pires, and may attack them evenpires, and may attack them even
without stakes or a magic weapon.without stakes or a magic weapon.
See also the Vampirism chapter forSee also the Vampirism chapter for
other uses of this skill.other uses of this skill.
Withstand Pain (B, W, D, R)Withstand Pain (B, W, D, R)
Once per encounter, the characterOnce per encounter, the character
ignores the first point of damageignores the first point of damage
received in that encounter.received in that encounter.
Whirlwind of Steel (W, B, D)Whirlwind of Steel (W, B, D)
This skill is usable only againstThis skill is usable only against
minions. When you kill a minionminions. When you kill a minion
with an attack, you may immedi-with an attack, you may immedi-
ately attack another minion at -1ately attack another minion at -1
during the same turn. You mayduring the same turn. You may
perform a perform a maximum of maximum of three three totaltotal
attacks in a turn (so a normalattacks in a turn (so a normal
attack, a second attack at -1 if theattack, a second attack at -1 if the
first kills a minion, and a thirdfirst kills a minion, and a third
attack at -2 if the second attackattack at -2 if the second attack
also kills a minion). This skill mayalso kills a minion). This skill may
not be used cumulatively withnot be used cumulatively with
Double Attack or other skills thatDouble Attack or other skills that
allow for multiple attacks. If yourallow for multiple attacks. If your
first attack is not enough to kill afirst attack is not enough to kill a
minion, for example if you roll a 3minion, for example if you roll a 3
while fighting level 4 minions, youwhile fighting level 4 minions, you
may NOT perform the additionalmay NOT perform the additional
roll. When using this skill, you mayroll. When using this skill, you may
NOT explode your dice. A characterNOT explode your dice. A character
may use this skill only if holding amay use this skill only if holding a
hand weapon or a two-handedhand weapon or a two-handed
weapon. An unarmed characterweapon. An unarmed character
may not use this skill. This skill maymay not use this skill. This skill may
be used only once per encounter.be used only once per encounter.

===== PAGE 24 =====
2323

===== PAGE 25 =====
2424
Expert SpellsExpert Spells
Expert spells are expert skills. TheyExpert spells are expert skills. They
may be learnt by a wizard or an elf may be learnt by a wizard or an elf 
with a successful xp roll. The wizardwith a successful xp roll. The wizard
or elf must be at least 5th level toor elf must be at least 5th level to
learn them. The new spell is addedlearn them. The new spell is added
to the character’s repertoire, andto the character’s repertoire, and
can now be cast once until the endcan now be cast once until the end
of the adventure. In future adven-of the adventure. In future adven-
tures, the spell may simply betures, the spell may simply be
chosen as one of the character’schosen as one of the character’s
spells for the adventure. A charac-spells for the adventure. A charac-
ter may memorize multiple copiester may memorize multiple copies
of the same Abyss spell if he wants.of the same Abyss spell if he wants.
Example: Blarg, a 6Example: Blarg, a 6 th th  level   level 
wizard, attempts an xp roll towizard, attempts an xp roll to
learn Mass Teleport. He rollslearn Mass Teleport. He rolls
a 5. Success! Instead of a 5. Success! Instead of 
 gaining  gaining a a level, level, Blarg Blarg hashas
added the Mass Teleport spell added the Mass Teleport spell 
to the spells that he can use.to the spells that he can use.
He now can use Mass Tele-He now can use Mass Tele-
 port  port once once until until the ethe end ond of thef the
current adventure. This spell current adventure. This spell 
is now part of his repertoire.is now part of his repertoire.
In future adventures, he could In future adventures, he could 
 prepa prepare re multimultiple ple instaninstances ces of of 
this spell.this spell.
Abyss ScrollsAbyss Scrolls
When a scroll is found in the Abyss,When a scroll is found in the Abyss,
roll d6 on the Abyss Scroll Table toroll d6 on the Abyss Scroll Table to
determine which spell it contains.determine which spell it contains.
These scrolls may be used by anyThese scrolls may be used by any
character of any level, except bar-character of any level, except bar-
barians, but characters who are notbarians, but characters who are not
wizards or elves will always countwizards or elves will always count
as level 1 for as level 1 for casting purposes.casting purposes.
Selling Abyss ScrollsSelling Abyss Scrolls: A scroll may: A scroll may
be sold for 150 gp per spell it con-be sold for 150 gp per spell it con-
tains.tains.
Learning Spells from ScrollsLearning Spells from Scrolls : : A A
wizard or elf may also use wizard or elf may also use the scrollthe scroll
to add the spell to his repertoire.to add the spell to his repertoire.
The scroll is destroyed in the pro-The scroll is destroyed in the pro-
cess. The spell is added to the listcess. The spell is added to the list
of spells that the caster may pre-of spells that the caster may pre-
pare. Learning a spell from a scrollpare. Learning a spell from a scroll
does not require an xp roll. Notedoes not require an xp roll. Note
that learning the spell from a that learning the spell from a scrollscroll
does NOT give the characterdoes NOT give the character
another spell use, it simply givesanother spell use, it simply gives
the character the option to includethe character the option to include
that spell in the spells prepared forthat spell in the spells prepared for
an adventure.an adventure.
Expert Spell ListExpert Spell List
Healing SurgeHealing Surge: All the characters: All the characters
in play, excluding the caster, heal 2in play, excluding the caster, heal 2
life. All vampires in play life. All vampires in play (minor and(minor and
major vampires from the boss andmajor vampires from the boss and
minion tables in this book) auto-minion tables in this book) auto-
matically lose 2 life.matically lose 2 life.
Infallible MissileInfallible Missile: This spell auto-: This spell auto-
matically inflicts 1 wound on amatically inflicts 1 wound on a
single target. Roll a die: on ansingle target. Roll a die: on an
exploding result, you may inflictexploding result, you may inflict
another wound on the same oranother wound on the same or
another target, and you may roll aanother target, and you may roll a
die again, and so on, until you faildie again, and so on, until you fail

===== PAGE 26 =====
2525
to roll an exploding result. If youto roll an exploding result. If you
are fighting against a boss, you mayare fighting against a boss, you may
inflict multiple wounds to the sameinflict multiple wounds to the same
boss. On minions, each wound willboss. On minions, each wound will
kill one minion.kill one minion.
A wizard of 8A wizard of 8 th th level or above can level or above can
create TWO infallible missiles eachcreate TWO infallible missiles each
time he casts this spell, and directtime he casts this spell, and direct
them at the same target or at twothem at the same target or at two
different targets, redirecting thedifferent targets, redirecting the
additional wounds as he sees fit.additional wounds as he sees fit.
Lifeforce ControlLifeforce Control: This spell allows: This spell allows
a wizard to wound himself to heala wizard to wound himself to heal
any one party member. For exam-any one party member. For exam-
ple, a wizard may lose 3 life andple, a wizard may lose 3 life and
heal up to 3 life on another partyheal up to 3 life on another party
member. This spell may also bemember. This spell may also be
cast against a vampire, inflicting thecast against a vampire, inflicting the
same number of life points to thesame number of life points to the
creature and the wizard.creature and the wizard.
Mass TeleportMass Teleport : The wizard may: The wizard may
use this spell like an Escape spell,use this spell like an Escape spell,
but for the whole party. In addition,but for the whole party. In addition,
the wizard is not limited to use thisthe wizard is not limited to use this
spell only to escape the dungeon,spell only to escape the dungeon,
but may use it to teleport himself but may use it to teleport himself 
and his friends to any other roomand his friends to any other room
that your party has already visited.that your party has already visited.
However, the spell is taxing, andHowever, the spell is taxing, and
the wizard takes 1 wound perthe wizard takes 1 wound per
person transported beyond him-person transported beyond him-
self. For example, a self. For example, a wizard teleport-wizard teleport-
ing himself and two friends will loseing himself and two friends will lose
2 Life points. You are not forced to2 Life points. You are not forced to
teleport the whole party, butteleport the whole party, but
friends left behind are supposed tofriends left behind are supposed to
be killed by the dangers of thebe killed by the dangers of the
dungeon.dungeon.
Aura of TerrorAura of Terror: The spell causes a: The spell causes a
monster (boss or groups of min-monster (boss or groups of min-
ions) to make a morale roll.ions) to make a morale roll.
Undead, monsters who neverUndead, monsters who never
make morale rolls, final bosses,make morale rolls, final bosses,
and monsters with a Fear attackand monsters with a Fear attack
(any monster whose description(any monster whose description
asks you to save versus fear) areasks you to save versus fear) are
immune to this spell. If cast in animmune to this spell. If cast in an
encounter with minions led by aencounter with minions led by a
boss, roll to affect the boss. If theboss, roll to affect the boss. If the
boss fleboss flees, the es, the minions fleminions flee too. e too. If If 
the boss is unaffected, the minionsthe boss is unaffected, the minions
DO NOT have to make a morale roll.DO NOT have to make a morale roll.
Reverse GazeReverse Gaze : If the wizard is: If the wizard is
asked to save versus a gaze attack,asked to save versus a gaze attack,
like the medusa’s petrifying starelike the medusa’s petrifying stare
or the catoblepas gaze, the wizardor the catoblepas gaze, the wizard
may automatically cast this spell onmay automatically cast this spell on
the monster. The wizard is safethe monster. The wizard is safe
from the gaze attack. In addition,from the gaze attack. In addition,
roll d8 + the wizard’s level versusroll d8 + the wizard’s level versus
the monster’s level. If the wizardthe monster’s level. If the wizard
wins, the monster is affected by hiswins, the monster is affected by his
own gaze (a medusa is turned toown gaze (a medusa is turned to
stone, a catoblepas is wounded).stone, a catoblepas is wounded).
The same will happen to otherThe same will happen to other
monsters in supplements or adven-monsters in supplements or adven-
tures whose powers are describedtures whose powers are described
as a gaze attack.as a gaze attack.

===== PAGE 27 =====
2626
HirelingsHirelings
When you enter the expert tier, youWhen you enter the expert tier, you
may hire retainers and profession-may hire retainers and profession-
als to help you in als to help you in your adventureyour adventures. s.
Bear in mind that hirelings are Bear in mind that hirelings are notnot
adventurers, so they may easily dieadventurers, so they may easily die
and run away. Still, they can beand run away. Still, they can be
useful allies.useful allies.
There are two general types of There are two general types of 
hirelings:hirelings: retainersretainers, who accom-, who accom-
pany your party in pany your party in adventureadventures, ands, and
professionalsprofessionals, who do not enter, who do not enter
the dungeon but offer their ser-the dungeon but offer their ser-
vices to help the party betweenvices to help the party between
sessions.sessions.
Hirelings are 0 level characters.Hirelings are 0 level characters.
They do not make xp rolls and doThey do not make xp rolls and do
not level up. They use a standardnot level up. They use a standard
d6 for their rollsd6 for their rolls, so often they will, so often they will
be able to pass saving throws andbe able to pass saving throws and
hit high level monsters only if theirhit high level monsters only if their
die roll explodes.die roll explodes.
Hirelings keep their money home.Hirelings keep their money home.
You pay them before the adventureYou pay them before the adventure
and they put the money away. Youand they put the money away. You
may not use their money to bribemay not use their money to bribe
monsters or to pay for monsters or to pay for equipment,equipment,
and you do not collect their moneyand you do not collect their money
if they die during the adventure.if they die during the adventure.
The party is required to pay for anyThe party is required to pay for any
equipment that they want to giveequipment that they want to give
to the hireling. If a hireling dies, youto the hireling. If a hireling dies, you
do not get your money back – it isdo not get your money back – it is
used for funeral expenses or asused for funeral expenses or as
heirloom to their offspring.heirloom to their offspring.
General Rules for RetainersGeneral Rules for Retainers
A party may have a maximum of A party may have a maximum of 
two retainers. More would slowtwo retainers. More would slow
down the party and be down the party and be too difficulttoo difficult
for you to keep track of, but feelfor you to keep track of, but feel
free to hire more if you playfree to hire more if you play Four Four 
 Again Against st DarkDarknessness as a cooperative, as a cooperative,
rpg-lite dungeon game where eachrpg-lite dungeon game where each
character is run by one player.character is run by one player.
Retainers must occupy a space inRetainers must occupy a space in
the party’s marching order, like anythe party’s marching order, like any
other character. A bodyguard (seeother character. A bodyguard (see
below) must be next to the charac-below) must be next to the charac-
ter he/she is protecting. An acolyteter he/she is protecting. An acolyte
must be next to the cleric must be next to the cleric he/she ishe/she is
helping.helping.
Each retainer has a hiring fee, inEach retainer has a hiring fee, in
gold pieces. The fee is per adven-gold pieces. The fee is per adven-
ture, and must be paid in advance.ture, and must be paid in advance.
Retainers do not expect to receiveRetainers do not expect to receive
a share of the treasure found. How-a share of the treasure found. How-
ever, if you do so, and assign toever, if you do so, and assign to
hirelings a portion equal to twicehirelings a portion equal to twice
their initial hiring fee, that hirelingtheir initial hiring fee, that hireling
will have a +1 to his morale rolls.will have a +1 to his morale rolls.
If a retainer dies and you want toIf a retainer dies and you want to
pay for his pay for his or her resurrection, youor her resurrection, you
can do so. The resurrection ritualcan do so. The resurrection ritual
will automatically be successful.will automatically be successful.
The resurrected hireling willThe resurrected hireling will
become fanatically loyal to thebecome fanatically loyal to the

===== PAGE 28 =====
2727
